### 2019

* **J. Li**, O. Grinenko, J. C. Mosher, J. Gonzalez-Martinez, R. M. Leahy, P. Chauvel,  
"Learning to define an electrical biomarker of the epileptogenic zone",  
*Human Brain Mapping*, 2019. (In press) &nbsp; [<i class="fa fa-quote-right"></i>](/files/bib/Li2019Ltdaebotez.bib) &nbsp; [<i class="fa fa-file-pdf-o"></i>](/files/pdf/Li2019Ltdaebotez.pdf){:target="Li2019Ltdaebotez-PDF"} &nbsp; [<i class="fa fa-code"></i>](/software/EZ_Fingerprint/ezf_main){:target="Li2019Ltdaebotez-CODE"}  
[https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.24813](https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.24813){:target="Li2019Ltdaebotez"}  
  <details>
    <summary style="font-size:16px">Abstract</summary>
        <p style="margin-left: 20px; text-align: justify; font-size:16px">
        Abstract The role of fast activity as a potential biomarker in localization of the epileptogenic zone (EZ) remains controversial due to recently reported unsatisfactory performance. We recently identified a “fingerprint” of the EZ as a time-frequency pattern that is defined by a combination of preictal spike(s), fast oscillatory activity, and concurrent suppression of lower frequencies. Here we examine the generalizability of the fingerprint in application to an independent series of patients (11 seizure-free and 13 non-seizure-free after surgery) and show that the fingerprint can also be identified in seizures with lower frequency (such as beta) oscillatory activity. In the seizure-free group, only 5 of 47 identified EZ contacts were outside the resection. In contrast, in the non-seizure-free group, 104 of 142 identified EZ contacts were outside the resection. We integrated the fingerprint prediction with the subject's MR images, thus providing individualized anatomical estimates of the EZ. We show that these fingerprint-based estimates in seizure-free patients are almost always inside the resection. On the other hand, for a large fraction of the nonseizure-free patients the estimated EZ was not well localized and was partially or completely outside the resection, which may explain surgical failure in such cases. We also show that when mapping fast activity alone onto MR images, the EZ was often over-estimated, indicating a reduced discriminative ability for fast activity relative to the full fingerprint for localization of the EZ.
        </p>
  </details>

* S. Choi, S. H. O'Neil, A. A. Joshi, **J. Li**, A. M. Bush, T. D. Coates, R. M. Leahy, J. C. Wood,  
"Anemia predicts lower white matter volume and cognitive performance in sickle and non-sickle cell anemia syndrome",  
*American Journal of Hematology*, vol. 94, no. 10, pp. 1055--1065, 2019.  &nbsp; [<i class="fa fa-quote-right"></i>](/files/bib/Choi2019Aplwmvacpisancas.bib) &nbsp; [<i class="fa fa-file-pdf-o"></i>](/files/pdf/Choi2019Aplwmvacpisancas.pdf){:target="Choi2019Aplwmvacpisancas-PDF"}  
[https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.25570](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.25570){:target="Choi2019Aplwmvacpisancas"}  
  <details>
    <summary style="font-size:16px">Abstract</summary>
        <p style="margin-left: 20px; text-align: justify; font-size:16px">
        Severe chronic anemia is an independent predictor of overt stroke, white matter damage, and cognitive dysfunction in the elderly. Severe anemia also predisposes to white matter strokes in young children, independent of the anemia subtype. We previously demonstrated symmetrically decreased white matter (WM) volumes in patients with sickle cell disease (SCD). In the current study, we investigated whether patients with non-sickle anemia also have lower WM volumes and cognitive dysfunction. Magnetic Resonance Imaging was performed on 52 clinically asymptomatic SCD patients (age=21.4±7.7; F=27, M=25; hemoglobin=9.6±1.6 g/dL), 26 non-sickle anemic patients (age=23.9±7.9; F=14, M=12; hemoglobin=10.8±2.5 g/dL) and 40 control subjects (age=27.7±11.3; F=28, M=12; hemoglobin=13.4±1.3 g/dL). Voxel-wise changes in WM brain volumes were compared to hemoglobin levels to identify brain regions that are vulnerable to anemia. White matter volume was diffusely lower in deep, watershed areas proportionally to anemia severity. After controlling for age, sex, and hemoglobin level, brain volumes were independent of disease. WM volume loss was associated with lower Full Scale Intelligence Quotient (FSIQ; P=.0048; r2=.18) and an abnormal burden of silent cerebral infarctions (P=.029) in males, but not in females. Hemoglobin count and cognitive measures were similar between subjects with and without white-matter hyperintensities. The spatial distribution of volume loss suggests chronic hypoxic cerebrovascular injury, despite compensatory hyperemia. Neurocognitive consequences of WM volume changes and silent cerebral infarction were strongly sexually dimorphic. Understanding the possible neurological consequences of chronic anemia may help inform our current clinical practices.
        </p>
  </details>

* **J. Li**, S. E. Luczak, I. G. Rosen,  
"Comparing a distributed parameter model-based system identification technique with more conventional methods for inverse problems",  
*Journal of Inverse and Ill-posed Problems*, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 703--717, 2019.  &nbsp; [<i class="fa fa-quote-right"></i>](/files/bib/Li2019Cadpmsitwmcmfip.bib)  
[https://doi.org/10.1515/jiip-2018-0006](https://doi.org/10.1515/jiip-2018-0006){:target="Li2019Cadpmsitwmcmfip"}  
  <details>
    <summary style="font-size:16px">Abstract</summary>
        <p style="margin-left: 20px; text-align: justify; font-size:16px">
        Three methods for the estimation of blood or breath alcohol concentration (BAC/BrAC) from biosensor measured transdermal alcohol concentration (TAC) are evaluated and compared. Specifically, we consider a system identification/quasi-blind deconvolution scheme based on a distributed parameter model with unbounded input and output for ethanol transport in the skin and compare it to two more conventional system identification and filtering/deconvolution techniques for ill-posed inverse problems, one based on frequency domain methods and the other on a time series approach using an ARMA input/output model. Our basis for comparison are five statistical measures of interest to alcohol researchers and clinicians: peak BAC/BrAC, time of peak BAC/BrAC, the ascending and descending slopes of the BAC/BrAC curve, and the area underneath the BAC/BrAC curve.
        </p>
  </details>

* **J. Li**, J. P. Haldar, J. C. Mosher, D. R. Nair, J. Gonzalez-Martinez, R. M. Leahy,  
"Scalable and robust tensor decomposition of spontaneous stereotactic EEG data",  
*IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering*, vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 1549--1558, 2019.  &nbsp; [<i class="fa fa-quote-right"></i>](/files/bib/Li2019SartdossEd.bib) &nbsp; [<i class="fa fa-code"></i>](/software/SRSCPD_ALS/srscpd_als_main){:target="Li2019SartdossEd-CODE"}  
[https://doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2018.2875467](https://doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2018.2875467){:target="Li2019SartdossEd"}  
  <details>
    <summary style="font-size:16px">Abstract</summary>
        <p style="margin-left: 20px; text-align: justify; font-size:16px">
        Objective: Identification of networks from resting brain signals is an important step in understanding the dynamics of spontaneous brain activity. We approach this problem using a tensor-based model. Methods: We develope a rank-recursive scalable and robust sequential canonical polyadic decomposition (SRSCPD) framework to decompose a tensor into several rank-1 components. Robustness and scalability are achieved using a warm start for each rank based on the results from the previous rank. Results: In simulations we show that SRSCPD consistently outperforms the multistart alternating least square (ALS) algorithm over a range of ranks and signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs), with lower computation cost. When applying SRSCPD to resting in-vivo stereotactic EEG (SEEG) data from two subjects with epilepsy, we found components corresponding to default mode and motor networks in both subjects. These components were also highly consistent within subject between two sessions recorded several hours apart. Similar components were not obtained using the conventional ALS algorithm. Conclusion: Consistent brain networks and their dynamic behaviors were identified from resting SEEG data using SRSCPD. Significance: SRSCPD is scalable to large datasets and therefore a promising tool for identification of brain networks in long recordings from single subjects.
        </p>
  </details>

* E. Cvetkovska, W. A. Martins, J. Gonzalez-Martinez, K. Taylor, **J. Li**, O. Grinenko, J. C. Mosher, R. M. Leahy, P. Chauvel, D. Nair,  
"Heterotopia or overlaying cortex: What about in-between?",  
*Epilepsy and Behavior Case Reports*, vol. 11, pp. 4--9, 2019.  &nbsp; [<i class="fa fa-quote-right"></i>](/files/bib/Cvetkovska2019HoocWai.bib) &nbsp; [<i class="fa fa-file-pdf-o"></i>](/files/pdf/Cvetkovska2019HoocWai.pdf){:target="Cvetkovska2019HoocWai-PDF"}  
[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebcr.2018.09.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebcr.2018.09.007){:target="Cvetkovska2019HoocWai"}  
  <details>
    <summary style="font-size:16px">Abstract</summary>
        <p style="margin-left: 20px; text-align: justify; font-size:16px">
        We describe a patient with unilateral periventricular nodular heterotopia (PNH) and drug-resistant epilepsy, whose SEEG revealed that seizures were arising from the PNH, with the almost simultaneous involvement of heterotopic neurons ("micronodules") scattered within the white matter, and subsequently the overlying cortex. Laser ablation of heterotopic nodules and the adjacent white matter rendered the patient seizure free. This case elucidates that “micronodules” scattered in white matter between heterotopic nodules and overlying cortex might be another contributor in complex epileptogenicity of heterotopia. Detecting patient-specific targets in the epileptic network of heterotopia creates the possibility to disrupt the pathological circuit by minimally invasive procedures.
        </p>
  </details>

### 2018

* A. A. Joshi, M. Chong, **J. Li**, S. Choi, R. M. Leahy,  
"Are you thinking what I'm thinking? Synchronization of resting fMRI time-series across subjects",  
*NeuroImage*, vol. 172, pp. 740--752, 2018.  &nbsp; [<i class="fa fa-quote-right"></i>](/files/bib/Joshi2018AytwItSorftas.bib) &nbsp; [<i class="fa fa-file-pdf-o"></i>](/files/pdf/Joshi2018AytwItSorftas.pdf){:target="Joshi2018AytwItSorftas-PDF"} &nbsp; [<i class="fa fa-code"></i>](https://neuroimage.usc.edu/neuro/Resources/BrainSync){:target="Joshi2018AytwItSorftas-CODE"}  
[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.01.058](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.01.058){:target="Joshi2018AytwItSorftas"}  
  <details>
    <summary style="font-size:16px">Abstract</summary>
        <p style="margin-left: 20px; text-align: justify; font-size:16px">
        We describe BrainSync, an orthogonal transform that allows direct comparison of resting fMRI (rfMRI) time-series across subjects. For this purpose, we exploit the geometry of the rfMRI signal space to propose a novel orthogonal transformation that synchronizes rfMRI time-series across sessions and subjects. When synchronized, rfMRI signals become approximately equal at homologous locations across subjects. The method is based on the observation that rfMRI data exhibit similar connectivity patterns across subjects, as reflected in the pairwise correlations between different brain regions. We show that if the data for two subjects have similar correlation patterns then their time courses can be approximately synchronized by an orthogonal transformation. This transform is unique, invertible, efficient to compute, and preserves the connectivity structure of the original data for all subjects. Analogously to image registration, where we spatially align structural brain images, this temporal synchronization of brain signals across a population, or within-subject across sessions, facilitates cross-sectional and longitudinal studies of rfMRI data. The utility of the BrainSync transform is illustrated through demonstrative simulations and applications including quantification of rfMRI variability across subjects and sessions, cortical functional parcellation across a population, timing recovery in task fMRI data, comparison of task and resting state data, and an application to complex naturalistic stimuli for annotation prediction.
        </p>
  </details>

* O. Grinenko<sup>&dagger;</sup>, **J. Li**<sup>&dagger;</sup>, J. C. Mosher, I. Z. Wang, J. C. Bulacio, J. Gonzalez-Martinez, D. Nair, I. Najm, R. M. Leahy, P. Chauvel,  
"A fingerprint of the epileptogenic zone in human epilepsies",  
*Brain*, vol. 141, no. 1, pp. 117--131, 2018.  &nbsp; [<i class="fa fa-quote-right"></i>](/files/bib/GrinenkoLi2018Afotezihe.bib) &nbsp; [<i class="fa fa-file-pdf-o"></i>](/files/pdf/GrinenkoLi2018Afotezihe.pdf){:target="GrinenkoLi2018Afotezihe-PDF"} &nbsp; [<i class="fa fa-code"></i>](/software/EZ_Fingerprint/ezf_main){:target="GrinenkoLi2018Afotezihe-CODE"}  
[https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awx306](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awx306){:target="GrinenkoLi2018Afotezihe"}  
  <details>
    <summary style="font-size:16px">Abstract</summary>
        <p style="margin-left: 20px; text-align: justify; font-size:16px">
        Defining a bio-electrical marker for the brain area responsible for initiating a seizure remains an unsolved problem. Fast gamma activity has been identified as the most specific marker for seizure onset, but conflicting results have been reported. In this study, we describe an alternative marker, based on an objective description of interictal to ictal transition, with the aim of identifying a time-frequency pattern or 'fingerprint' that can differentiate the epileptogenic zone from areas of propagation. Seventeen patients who underwent stereoelectroencephalography were included in the study. Each had seizure onset characterized by sustained gamma activity and were seizure-free after tailored resection or laser ablation. We postulated that the epileptogenic zone was always located inside the resection region based on seizure freedom following surgery. To characterize the ictal frequency pattern, we applied the Morlet wavelet transform to data from each pair of adjacent intracerebral electrode contacts. Based on a visual assessment of the time-frequency plots, we hypothesized that a specific time-frequency pattern in the epileptogenic zone should include a combination of (i) sharp transients or spikes; preceding (ii) multiband fast activity concurrent; with (iii) suppression of lower frequencies. To test this hypothesis, we developed software that automatically extracted each of these features from the time-frequency data. We then used a support vector machine to classify each contact-pair as being within epileptogenic zone or not, based on these features. Our machine learning system identified this pattern in 15 of 17 patients. The total number of identified contacts across all patients was 64, with 58 localized inside the resected area. Subsequent quantitative analysis showed strong correlation between maximum frequency of fast activity and suppression inside the resection but not outside. We did not observe significant discrimination power using only the maximum frequency or the timing of fast activity to differentiate contacts either between resected and non-resected regions or between contacts identified as epileptogenic versus non-epileptogenic. Instead of identifying a single frequency or a single timing trait, we observed the more complex pattern described above that distinguishes the epileptogenic zone. This pattern encompasses interictal to ictal transition and may extend until seizure end. Its time-frequency characteristics can be explained in light of recent models emphasizing the role of fast inhibitory interneurons acting on pyramidal cells as a prominent mechanism in seizure triggering. The pattern clearly differentiates the epileptogenic zone from areas of propagation and, as such, represents an epileptogenic zone 'fingerprint'.
        </p>
  </details>
